---
title: Exception Handling - Python
layout: post
icon : fa-code 
---

No matter how good the algorithm is, or how well thought out the problem solving approach is, there exists a chance that a program may run into an error. If an error goes un-handled it may break the whole program. To avoid such conditions we need to be able to foresee where the errors might occur and handle them appropriately. Python has the necessary tools to catch exceptions and to handle the program flow when they do occur.

## Catching an exception (Try-Except block)  

A common error is division by zero, which as the name suggests occurs when any number is divided by zero. So instead of getting stuck in a loop the python interpreter throws an exception. To catch this exception we can use the `try` and `except` blocks.

```python
# Take a number from user
number = input("Enter a number")
# Try to divide 50 by the number
try:
    ans = 50/number
except ZeroDivisionError as excp:
    ans = False
    print("Trying to divide by zero")
```

Additionally there are many other types of exceptions in the [standard library](https://docs.python.org/3/library/exceptions.html) apart from the exceptions found in 3rd party libraries.

__NOTE__ The `except` will also catch the subclasses of the error type we pass it.  
Also we can catch the general `Exception` which will catch all exceptions or pass no exception to `except` which will also serve the same purpose i.e. catch all exceptions, but we will not be able to do anything with the caught exception if we do not pass the type of error we are trying to catch.

## Try-Except-Else  

Sometimes it may be necessary to change the behavior of the program depending on whether an exception occurs or not. For that we use the `try`-`except`-`else`-blocks.  
For example if we want to open a file to read and if the error occurs we want to return a standard value we can do it like so.

```python
try:
    my_file = open('file.txt')
except IOError as excp:
    return False
else:
    return my_file
```

Here  

- The `try` block will execute the statements where the exception may occur.
- `except` block will execute incase the exception occurs.
- `else` block will execute if no exception occurs.

__NOTE__ the `try` block requires the `except` block or it will still raise the exception and interrupt the program.

## Try-Except-Finally  

In case we want a block of code to execute no matter if an exception occurs or not we use the `finally` block. This block executes irrespective of the exception.

```python
try:
    my_file = open('file.txt')
except IOError as excp:
    log.error("Exception occurred: {}".format(excp))
finally:
    logger.info("Operation ended at: {}".format(datetime.datetime.now()))
```

## Raising Exceptions  

When writing custom classes or functions what might be used by other scripts or users we can also raise our own exceptions to give a more detailed explanation of the exception that occurred. This is done by the `raise` statement which raises an exception. The exception can be of any type, wither builtin or custom made.  
For example we can raise a custom `IOError` for a specific file which is used by our script.

```python
try:
    configs_file = open("config.json")
except IOError as excp:
    raise IOError("Configuration file not found")
```

So now if the file is not found it will give our custom error message instead of the standard  `IOError`.  
We can also raise the standard exception that is already caught.  
For example if we want to log that the file is not found but raise the standard `IOError` we can do it like so.

```python
try:
    configs_file = open("config.json")
except IOError as excp:
    logger.error("Configuration file not present")
    raise
```

Here the last `raise` statement will raise the standard `IOError` which is caught by the `try-except` block.

## Writing Custom exceptions  

Instead of raising the standard or other builtin exceptions we can also make our own custom exceptions.

```python
class ConfigFileError(FileNotFoundError):
     def __init__(self):
         FileNotFoundError.__init__(self, "Configuration file not found")
```

The exception must subclass the standard `Exception` class or any of it's subclasses.  
Then the same exception can be raised just like before with the `raise` statement.

```python
try:
    configs_file = open("config.json")
except ConfigFileError as excp:
    raise ConfigFileError()
```

Because we have already defined the error message we do not pass any arguments to the `ConfigFileError`, but it is not a restriction.
