---
title: Mapping - Python Multiprocessing
layout: post
icon : fa-code 
---

The GIL in the CPython implementation of python is the topic of many heated debates. What is basically does is that is doen't allow for threads to flow onto other cores to utilize the maximum efficiency of the system. But there are many ways of exploiting the multi-core architecture of the system using python.
## Mapping  
Mapping is to "map" a set of inputs onto a function. Which is to say that a set of inputs will be mutated as defined in a function.  
For example we have a function which performs complex computation like so  
```
def computation(z):
    x = z ** 2 + 0.5
    y = x ** 2 + 0.6
    return y ** 2 + 0.7
```
then this function can me mapped to an iterable input like so  
```
inputs = range(10000000)
out = list(map(computation, inputs))
```  
## Multi-processed Map  
When mapping is done via multiple processes it allows for different instances of the python interpreter to be run on different cores of the system and thereby exploiting the full processing power. The standard library gives an implementation of it via the [multiprocessing](https://docs.python.org/3.6/library/multiprocessing.html) package  
Multi-processed mapping is done like so  
```
from multiprocessing import Pool

inputs = range(10000000)

with Pool(4) as p:
    out = p.map(computation, inputs)
```  
## Advantages and disadvantages  
In case of a large number of inputs and complex calculations it can yield better results.  
```
# For 10,000,000 inputs
Pooled time 4 jobs: 52.76807451248169
Normal time : 89.4371726512909
```  
But be warned it does not give better results in all cases. E.g. if the number of inputs is small it will actually give wore performance than that of simple mapping.  
```
# For 10 inputs
Pooled time 4 jobs: 0.1567082405090332
Normal time : 0.00017833709716796875
```  
Also the number of jobs or workers if also important. Too many workers and the system will stall or just saturate at a minimum optimized time. A small number of workers and the full optimization may not be achieved.  
## Try it for yourself!  
Use the code below to play around and experiment for different cases.  
```
#! usr/bin/python3

import time
from multiprocessing import Pool

def computation(z):
    x = z ** 2 + 0.5
    y = x ** 2 + 0.6
    return y ** 2 + 0.7

def main():
    inputs = range(10000000)

    start = time.time()
    with Pool(4) as p:
        out = p.map(computation, inputs)
    end = time.time()
    print("Pooled time 4 jobs:", end - start)

    start = time.time()
    out = list(map(computation, inputs))
    end = time.time()
    print("Normal time :", end - start)

if __name__ == '__main__':
    main()

```