---
title: Asynchronous programming - Python
layout: post
icon : fa-code 
---

Apart from creating threads and processes there exists another form of native concurrency offered by the python standard library.
Asynchronous Input Output or [AsyncIO](https://docs.python.org/3/library/asyncio.html). In asynchronous programming a single thread is used as the event loop and the control is switched between different coroutines.  
__NOTE__ the AsyncIO exists before python version 3.5 but it was more polished in version 3.5 and above.

## How AsyncIO is different  

The advantage of this is that while one coroutine waits for a response from one coroutine it can shift control to another operation therefore reducing the overall execution time by efficiently managing the wait times of I/O bound operations. Also, as it runs on a single thread it consumes less resources than threading and tends to be more scalable with lower resource usage. However different loops can be run on different threads or processes if the design of the application requires it.

## The architecture of an asynchronous application  

The asynchronous program consists of an event loop in which different coroutines run. The coroutines are designed in a way that they transfer control whenever they have to wait for any operation's result so that the event loop can execute other coroutines. Then after the result of the operation is available it picks up the execution of the coroutine from the point where it left off.  
The event loop can executes `Tasks` which are coroutine wrappers which actually run on the event loop, but the available methods of the asyncio module makes it seamless to convert coroutines into tasks.  
`Future` objects are also available similar to `concurrent.futures.Future` but in this module they are asynchronous i.e. do not block the execution so that control can be transferred.

## Running coroutines in an event loop  

Since python version 3.5 the new way of defining coroutines is introduced. Instead of using the `@asyncio.coroutine` we can use `async def` which is the preferred way going forward. Also, the control is transferred using `await` instead of `yield from`.  
Now we define a coroutine.

```python
import asyncio

async def my_coroutine():
    await asyncio.sleep(1)
    return True
```

This is a simple coroutine that waits 1 second before returning the value `True`. Here the `asyncio.sleep` is a non blocking waiting method which allows the control to be transferred while it waits.  
Now to run this coroutine we can simply  

```python
asyncio.run(my_coroutine())
```

This takes care of using the threads event loop and using it to run the coroutine. However we can have more control of the tasks in the event loop and the results they return.

## An asynchronous sensor value simulator  

In this example we assume to coroutines to read values from sensors and print values to the console. We define the coroutines as

```python
import asyncio

# Slow sensor
async def sensor_10hz():
    while True:
        await asyncio.sleep(0.1)
        print("--- 10HZ")
# Fast sensor
async def sensor_100hz():
    while True:
        await asyncio.sleep(0.01)
        print("+ 100HZ")
```

Both these coroutines have different wait times and they run forever i.e. simulate reading values constantly. Now we add these coroutines to the event loop.

```python
def main():
    # Get event loop
    loop = asyncio.get_event_loop()
    # Add coroutines as tasks
    loop.create_task(sensor_100hz())
    loop.create_task(sensor_10hz())
    # Run the loop forever
    try:
        loop.run_forever()
    # Stop on interrupt
    except KeyboardInterrupt:
        print("Ending all tasks...")
        loop.stop()
        loop.close()
        print("Finished !")

if __name__ == '__main__':
    main()
```

Here in the `main()` we first get the threads event loop `asyncio.get_event_loop()`, and then pass the coroutines as tasks to the event loop using the `loop.create_task()`. Finally we start the loop `loop.run_forever()` which starts the loop and the added tasks. This method doesn't wait for anything and runs the loop till we manually stop the loop with `loop.stop()` which stops all the pending tasks and `loop.close()` closes the event loop.

## Returning values from coroutines  

Like regular functions or methods coroutines can also return values.

```python
import asyncio

async def my_coro():
    await asyncio.sleep(1)
    return "From coroutine"

def main():
    loop = asyncio.get_event_loop()
    result = loop.run_until_complete(my_coro1())
    print(result)

if __name__ == '__main__':
    main()
```

Here the loop runs until the coroutine is completed by `loop.run_until_complete()` and internally closes the event loop. Also instead of returning the value to the event loop we can return values to other coroutines too.

```python
async def my_coro1():
    value = await my_coro2()
    return "From caller " + value

async def my_coro2():
    await asyncio.sleep(1)
    return "From called "

def main():
    loop = asyncio.get_event_loop()
    result = loop.run_until_complete(my_coro1())
    print(result)

if __name__ == '__main__':
    main()
```

Here `my_coro1` calls `my_coro2` and waits for it's execution then used the returned value to return the value to the event loop.

## Using futures to get values  

Instead of using return values we can use `Future` objects to get values from coroutines.

```python
async def my_future_coro(future):
    await asyncio.sleep(1)
    future.set_result("From Future")

def main():
    loop = asyncio.get_event_loop()
    future_value = asyncio.Future()
    asyncio.ensure_future(my_future_coro(future_value))
    result = loop.run_until_complete(future_value)
    print(result)

if __name__ == '__main__':
    main()
```

The advantage of this is that we can do other work while the result is being waited for or wait for the result before it is computed while doing other work. Also a number of futures can be waited on simultaneously.

## Using an arbitrary number of coroutines  

We can also dynamically create a number of `Future` objects that run in a coroutine.

```python
async def pooled_coro(value):
    await asyncio.sleep(value/10)
    return value + 10

def main():
    values = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]
    loop = asyncio.get_event_loop()
    result = asyncio.gather(*[pooled_coro(i) for i in values])
    result = loop.run_until_complete(result)
    print(result)

if __name__ == '__main__':
    main()
```

Here `asyncio.gather` converts the result of all the coroutine inputs as a `Future` object that can be waited on by using `loop.run_until_complete`.