---
title: Vecorizing - Numpy
layout: post
icon : fa-code 
---

More than often we have to process large amounts of data, mostly numeric. It becomes useful if that data is stored in the form of arrays. Python has built-in support for many types of collections such as lists, dictionaries and sorted sets, but they are used to store data and are not optimized for mathematical processing.  
For mathematical processing of arrays python has a widely used library called [Numpy](http://www.numpy.org/). It supports a large number of data types of arrays and a whole suite of operations that can be performed on them. Also, the fact that it is written in C under the hood makes it faster than regular python.

## Vectorization of code  

Normally to store an amount of numbers we would put them in a `list`. Instead we can use numpy to create an array from a list like so

```python
import numpy as np
numbers = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
array = np.array(numbers)
```

This doesn't seem like much yet but if we were to perform operations on the array it would become faster. Also the data in the array is stored as C data types and takes less space than a python object.

## Vector operations

Now that we have made an array we can perform operation on it. For example if we want to add a number to each of the elements of the array we can do so like this.

```python
added = array + 5
```

Where as for a regular list we would have to do something like this.

```python
for element in range(numbers):
    numbers[element] = numbers[element] + 5
```

This operation inside the `for` loop will take longer than the array operation.  
There are other operators available as well. Such as

- Multiplication, division, subtraction
- Bitwise operations (AND, OR, NOT...)
- Exponential
- Trigonometric operations (sine, cosine...)

## Indexing the array

Sub portions of the array can be accessed similar to what we would do with a regular list.

```python
sub_array = array[1:3]
array_element = [2]
```

Also for multidimensional arrays we can pass an index for each dimension or a `:` for all the elements.

```python
sub_md_array = md_array[1, 3:5]
all_elements = md_array[1, :]
```

This indexing is similar to what you would do in MatLab.  
**NOTE**  
We can also access elements as index of index for a multi-dimensional i.e. `array[0][0]` but it will be different than passing a tuple as the index.

```python
# Will return False
sub_array[:2, :2] == sub_array[:2][:2]
```

Here `sub_array[:2][:2]` is finding the first 3 elements of the array returned by `sub_array[:2]`.  
Which is different form `sub_array[:2, :2]` which is finding the first 3 elements of the first 3 arrays.

## Array operations

We can also perform operations on whole arrays with other arrays rather than elements. For example we need to add a 2D number to a 2D array we can do it like so

```python
added_2d = array_2d + (1, 3)
```

Other than that we can also perform matrix operations such as the scalar(dot) or the vector(cross) product of arrays.

```python
dot_prod = np.dot(array1, array2)
cross_prod = np.cross(array1, array2) # Inner dimensions must match
```

Additionally there are many more operations which can be found in the [documentation](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/numpy/reference/).

## Array reduction  

We can also perform an operation on an array that returns a single value rather than an array. The most common one is the sum of all the elements of the array, which can be done like so

```python
# Whole array
sum_of_array = array.sum()
# Along a specified axis
sum_of_axes = array.sum(axis=0)
```

## Uses  

Array operations are used very often, whether it's processing images or classifying data or just handling large quantities of data. Arrays provide fast and convenient methods for dealing with such operations and numpy is the most used package for python when it comes to vector processing.
