---
title: Date Time - Python
layout: post
icon : fa-code 
---

On many occasions we have to deal with the date and time of certain operations or events. To deal with date and times python has a built in library [datetime](https://docs.python.org/3/library/datetime.html). It provides many handy functions to measure and manipulate the date and time.

## Getting the current date and time  

We can get the current date and time like so

```python
import datetime as dt
# Current date and time
curr = dt.datetime.now()
# Accessing Date
print(curr.year)
print(curr.month)
print(curr.day)
# Accessing Time
print(curr.hour)
print(curr.minute)
print(curr.second)
```

This will return the month and day as integers. For month 1 to 12 and date from 1 to 31.  
__NOTE__ This will use the system's current time and timezone.

## Specific date or time  

We can also make a specific date or time object from integers like so.

```python
rand_day = dt.date(2018, 6, 15)
rand_time = dt.time(10, 32, 50)
rand_datetime = dt.datetime(2018, 6, 15, 10, 32, 50)
```

These datetime objects become useful when we have to use them for other operations.

## Viewing datetime as formatted strings  

We can format date and time as a string with a choice of displaying them as we want. This is done by the `.strftime()` method which takes a format string as the argument to format how the date time are shown.

```python
curr = dt.datetime.now()
dt_format = "%H:%M:%S  %A  %B  %Y"
print(curr.strftime(dt_format))
```

A complete list for the format string directives can be found [here](https://docs.python.org/3/library/datetime.html#strftime-strptime-behavior)

## Create datetime from a string  

We can also use a string to create a datetime object. This is done via the `.strptime()` method. The method takes a string representing the date and time, and another format string same as for the `.strftime()`.

```python
date_time = "22:50:32  Wednesday  July  2018"
dt_format = "%H:%M:%S  %A  %B  %Y"
dt_obj = dt.datetime.strptime(date_time, dt_format)
print(dt_obj)
```

## Datetime arithmetic  

We can also perform date time arithmetic using the `.timedelta()` functions. The `.timedelta()` represents a change in time e.g. a change of one day or one hour etc. So if we were to change the date to a week later we can simply add a `.timedelta()` of 7 days.

```python
one_week = dt.timedelta(days=7)
curr = dt.datetime.now()
next_week = curr + one_week
print(next_week)
last_week = curr - one_week
print(last_week)
```

We can also have other `.timedelta()` values for hours, minutes and seconds.

## Datetime comparisons  

We can also compare datetime objects. Given two datetime objects we can use regular comparison operators.

```python
check_dt = dt.datetime(2018, 10, 15, 13, 45, 15)

if dt.datetime.now() < check_dt:
    print("Still time left")
elif dt.datetime.now() > check_dt:
    print("The time has passed")
```
