---
title: File paths - Python
layout: post
icon : fa-code 
---

Commonly, many python scripts have to access data files stored somewhere on the local machine and all of these files are identified by their path.
Many times we use an IDE to run the scripts and hard code a relative path to the file. A common practice would be to do the following,

```python
cv2.imread('images/image001.jpg')
```

But the file(image file in this case) may not always be located at that relative address with respect to the interpreter. For example if the script and images folder is located in a directory `"Desktop/Work/My_Project"` then these two execution locations will mean very different things.

```bash
# From Desktop
$python Work/My_Project/my_app.py
# From The Project Directory
$python my_app.py
```

In the first case the relative path will fail as that path from where the interpreter was launched is not correct.
The interpreter's path and the path of the script being run is not the same thing.  

## Finding the absolute path to the script  

To find the absolute path to the script we can use the python's [os.path module](https://docs.python.org/3/library/os.path.html)
more specifically these two functions.  

- os.path.abspath()
- os.path.dirname()

The first one gives the absolute path to a given file and the second one gives the directory only i.e. it removes the file name from the path.
We can use the to create a constant in our script like this.

```python
BASE_PATH = os.path.dirname(os.path.abspath(__file__))
cv2.imread(BASE_PATH + "/images/image001.jpg")
```

Here the `__file__` is the name of the current script being executed. It is built in to the interpreter and returns the name of the current file.  

## Use Cases  

You might ask yourself why would I ever need that? Well in cases like the one one mentioned above i.e. the interpreter might be started from any other location. Also if the script is being called by another script and the two might not be in the same location.
E.g. a GUI or a web service asks for a stored image, then the GUI or web server might call this script from anywhere on the system and the path to the file must be correct.  

## Try it for yourself  

Save this script on your system and try calling the interpreter from different locations to see the differences.

```python
#! /usr/bin/python3
import os
base_path = os.path.dirname(os.path.abspath(__file__))
print('Absolute file to the directory')
print(base_path)
print('Interpreter\'s current working directory')
print(os.getcwd())
```
