---
title: Report Writing - Jupyter Notebook
layout: post
icon : fa-code 
---

More than often we have to present our code in a format which can be understood by others, such as people who do not have much experience in coding. Python provides an excellent tool to write up such documents with the [Jupyter](http://jupyter.org/) library. However jupyter is not restricted to python. It has a wide array of features, some of which we will explore below.

## Adding write up  

Jupyter has blocks for inputs. These are of two main types  

- Markdown (for regular text)
- Code  

## Plain Text  

Plain text can be added in the markdown blocks. Apart from regular text it can be formatted to different types  

- Heading with # sign, number of # signifies the heading level.
- Bold, italic text with ** or * and bold and italic with ***.
- LaTeX equations. $ for inline and $$ for new line.
- Links can be added by placing the name in [] and the link in () after it.  

Additionally it also supports HTML markups for editing text and adding images or links. But in some cases it may not work very well when converting the notebook to other types such as PDF or LaTeX.

## Code  

Regular code can be added to the notebook in the code block and it will show the output of that code inside the notebooks.  
For matplotlib graphs we have to add `"%matplotlib inline"` before plotting the graphs. It also has many other code helper such as `"%%time"` which will give the execution time of the code block.

## Exporting to PDF / LaTeX  

The notebook can be exported to different formats via the command line utility "nbconvert". A complete list of formats is available [here](https://nbconvert.readthedocs.io/en/latest/usage.html).
Eg to convert to PDF we can use  

```bash
jupyter nbconvert --to pdf notebook.ipynb
```

However you may need to install certain dependencies.  
__NOTE__  
Most of the time the automatic conversion to PDF does not format the notebook to the way we want. To work around that we can first convert it to LaTeX an then edit the LaTeX before converting to PDF.
